wk3/scripts/02.hostile.md, before:

# Host removal through alignment

## Alignment
Genome alignment is the process of mapping a sequence of DNA to a reference genome. We often use a tool called BWA or burros-wheeler aligner to do this. BWA is a software package for mapping low-divergent sequences against a large reference genome, such as the human genome. It consists of three algorithms: BWA-backtrack, BWA-SW and BWA-MEM. The first algorithm is designed for Illumina sequence reads up to 100bp, while the rest two for longer sequences up to 1Mbp. BWA-MEM and BWA-SW share similar features such as the support of long reads and chimeric alignment, but BWA-MEM, which is the latest, is generally recommended as it is faster and more accurate. BWA-MEM also has better performance than BWA-backtrack for 70-100bp Illumina reads.

### Indexing the reference genome:

* BWA first preprocesses the reference genome by constructing an index using the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT) algorithm.
* The BWT algorithm reorganizes the reference genome sequence into a data structure that enables fast pattern matching during the alignment process.
* This index facilitates quick lookup of potential alignment positions for sequencing reads.

### Seed finding:

* BWA breaks each sequencing read into shorter subsequences called "seeds".
* These seeds are typically around 32 base pairs long and are used as starting points for the alignment process.
* BWA efficiently identifies potential alignment positions in the reference genome for each seed using the index.

### Exact matching:

* BWA performs an exact match extension from each seed to find regions in the reference genome that match the seed sequence exactly.
* It uses an efficient backward search algorithm to extend the seed in both directions along the reference genome, looking for exact matches.
* This step identifies potential alignment locations where the sequencing read may align perfectly to the reference genome.

### Smith-Waterman alignment:

* If exact matches are found, BWA uses the Smith-Waterman algorithm, a dynamic programming algorithm, to perform local alignment around these matches.
* Smith-Waterman alignment calculates the optimal alignment score between the sequencing read and the reference genome in the vicinity of the exact matches.
* This step allows BWA to handle small indels (insertions or deletions) and mismatches between the read and the reference.

### Scoring and selecting alignments:

* BWA scores each potential alignment based on factors such as the number of matches, mismatches, and gaps.
* It selects the alignment with the highest score or the one that meets certain quality criteria.
* BWA also assigns a mapping quality score to each alignment, which represents the likelihood that the alignment is correct.

## Host removal

While we can use alignment to map sequencing reads to a reference genome, we can also use it to remove host contamination from metagenomic data. This process involves aligning the sequencing reads to the host genome and discarding the aligned reads, leaving behind the non-host (microbial) reads.

A recently developed tool called [Hostile](https://github.com/bede/hostile) has been designed specifically for this purpose. Hostile uses minimap2, a versatile sequence alignment program for long reads, to align metagenomic reads to a host reference genome. It then filters out the aligned reads, leaving only the unaligned reads, which are presumed to be of microbial origin. In your case, microbial will hopefully mean viral!

## Using Hostile

Now back to the command line. We will use Hostile to remove host contamination from our metagenomic data. First you will need to install yet another conda environment. This time we will use the `bede/hostile` environment. 

### Install Hostile
```bash
conda create --prefix "/home/people/<username>/tools/hostile_env" -c conda-forge -c bioconda hostile
conda activate /home/people/<username>/tools/hostile_env
```

### Identify the host genome
Next we will have to identify the host genome(s) associated with our datasets. You will need to review the publication or SRA metadata associated with your datasets to identify the host genome(s) that you want to remove. For example, if you are working with human samples, you will want to use the human reference genome (GRCh38) as the host genome. If you are working with mouse samples, you will want to use the mouse reference genome (GRCm38). If you are working with samples from a non-model organism, you may need to identify a closely related reference genome to use as the host genome.

If you are working with complex environmental sample it can be difficult to identify the host genome(s) associated with your datasets. In this case, you may need to consider what host is most likely to be present in your samples based on the sample collection method and the environment from which the samples were collected and has a reference genome easily available. For example, if you are working with samples collected from wastewater, you may want to use the human reference genome as the host genome, as human DNA is likely to be present in the samples and the human reference genome is readily available.

To download reference genomes from NCBI GenBank we will use the conda environment from week one; Entrez Direct. You may need to install this environment if you have not already. If you do not have a references folder within your training directory, create one now, as shown below. 

```bash
module load anaconda/3.5.2
source activate /home/people/<username>/tools/edirect_env
outdir=[define here]
output_file="human_genome.fa"
accession_number="GCF_000001405.39"
response=$(efetch -db nuccore -id "$accession_number" -format fasta -mode text 2>/dev/null)
echo "$response" > "$outdir/$output_file"
conda deactivate
module unload anaconda/3.5.2
```

### Mask reference genomes
To really improve our chance of obtaining clean viral reads from the ONT sequencing datasets, we can peform an intermediate step called 'masking'. While, hosts and their viruses are usually genetically diverse, there are sometimes regions of similarity. We can mask these regions in the host genome to prevent the alignment of viral reads to these regions, and this removal. This will help to ensure that we are only removing host reads and not viral reads.

* You will need to identify the viruses in your dataset and create a reference file. You can use the NCBI GenBank database & Entrez Direct (conda env) to download the reference genomes for the viruses in your dataset.
* You will then use hostile to mask your host reference genome with viral reference genomes. This will prevent the alignment of viral reads to the host genome and their subsequent removal.

```bash
hostile mask human.fasta lots-of-viral-genomes.fasta --threads 8
```

### Remove host contamination
Now that we have our masked host genome, we can use Hostile to remove host contamination from our metagenomic data. 

```bash
hostile clean --fastq1 data.fastq.gz
```

### Check the read lengths
To check the read lengths of the cleaned data, you can use the following command:

```bash
zcat data.fastq.gz | awk 'NR%4==2{print length($1)}' | sort -n | uniq -c
```

Compare this to the uncleaned reads to see if the host removal has worked:

```bash
zcat data.fastq.gz | awk 'NR%4==2{print length($1)}' | sort -n | uniq -c
```

Commit message:

changed entrez-direct to curl

wk3/scripts/02.hostile.md, after:

# Host removal through alignment

## Alignment
Genome alignment is the process of mapping a sequence of DNA to a reference genome. We often use a tool called BWA or burros-wheeler aligner to do this. BWA is a software package for mapping low-divergent sequences against a large reference genome, such as the human genome. It consists of three algorithms: BWA-backtrack, BWA-SW and BWA-MEM. The first algorithm is designed for Illumina sequence reads up to 100bp, while the rest two for longer sequences up to 1Mbp. BWA-MEM and BWA-SW share similar features such as the support of long reads and chimeric alignment, but BWA-MEM, which is the latest, is generally recommended as it is faster and more accurate. BWA-MEM also has better performance than BWA-backtrack for 70-100bp Illumina reads.

### Indexing the reference genome:

* BWA first preprocesses the reference genome by constructing an index using the Burrows-Wheeler Transform (BWT) algorithm.
* The BWT algorithm reorganizes the reference genome sequence into a data structure that enables fast pattern matching during the alignment process.
* This index facilitates quick lookup of potential alignment positions for sequencing reads.

### Seed finding:

* BWA breaks each sequencing read into shorter subsequences called "seeds".
* These seeds are typically around 32 base pairs long and are used as starting points for the alignment process.
* BWA efficiently identifies potential alignment positions in the reference genome for each seed using the index.

### Exact matching:

* BWA performs an exact match extension from each seed to find regions in the reference genome that match the seed sequence exactly.
* It uses an efficient backward search algorithm to extend the seed in both directions along the reference genome, looking for exact matches.
* This step identifies potential alignment locations where the sequencing read may align perfectly to the reference genome.

### Smith-Waterman alignment:

* If exact matches are found, BWA uses the Smith-Waterman algorithm, a dynamic programming algorithm, to perform local alignment around these matches.
* Smith-Waterman alignment calculates the optimal alignment score between the sequencing read and the reference genome in the vicinity of the exact matches.
* This step allows BWA to handle small indels (insertions or deletions) and mismatches between the read and the reference.

### Scoring and selecting alignments:

* BWA scores each potential alignment based on factors such as the number of matches, mismatches, and gaps.
* It selects the alignment with the highest score or the one that meets certain quality criteria.
* BWA also assigns a mapping quality score to each alignment, which represents the likelihood that the alignment is correct.

## Host removal

While we can use alignment to map sequencing reads to a reference genome, we can also use it to remove host contamination from metagenomic data. This process involves aligning the sequencing reads to the host genome and discarding the aligned reads, leaving behind the non-host (microbial) reads.

A recently developed tool called [Hostile](https://github.com/bede/hostile) has been designed specifically for this purpose. Hostile uses minimap2, a versatile sequence alignment program for long reads, to align metagenomic reads to a host reference genome. It then filters out the aligned reads, leaving only the unaligned reads, which are presumed to be of microbial origin. In your case, microbial will hopefully mean viral!

## Using Hostile

Now back to the command line. We will use Hostile to remove host contamination from our metagenomic data. First you will need to install yet another conda environment. This time we will use the `bede/hostile` environment. 

### Install Hostile
```bash
conda create --prefix "/home/people/<username>/tools/hostile_env" -c conda-forge -c bioconda hostile
conda activate /home/people/<username>/tools/hostile_env
```

### Identify the host genome
Next we will have to identify the host genome(s) associated with our datasets. You will need to review the publication or SRA metadata associated with your datasets to identify the host genome(s) that you want to remove. For example, if you are working with human samples, you will want to use the human reference genome (GRCh38) as the host genome. If you are working with mouse samples, you will want to use the mouse reference genome (GRCm38). If you are working with samples from a non-model organism, you may need to identify a closely related reference genome to use as the host genome.

If you are working with complex environmental sample it can be difficult to identify the host genome(s) associated with your datasets. In this case, you may need to consider what host is most likely to be present in your samples based on the sample collection method and the environment from which the samples were collected and has a reference genome easily available. For example, if you are working with samples collected from wastewater, you may want to use the human reference genome as the host genome, as human DNA is likely to be present in the samples and the human reference genome is readily available.

To download reference genomes from NCBI GenBank we will use curl. You can use the following command to download the reference genome for your sample set:

```bash
# Use curl to download the reference genome for your sample set
curl https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/all/GCF/000/803/125/GCF_000803125.2_CamDro3/GCF_000803125.2_CamDro3_genomic.fna.gz --output fasta_trygain.fna.gz
# Use curl to download the virus reference database and save it to the references folder on your home directory
curl https://rvdb.dbi.udel.edu/download/C-RVDBvCurrent.fasta.gz --output /home/references
```
### Mask reference genomes
To really improve our chance of obtaining clean viral reads from the ONT sequencing datasets, we can peform an intermediate step called 'masking'. While, hosts and their viruses are usually genetically diverse, there are sometimes regions of similarity. We can mask these regions in the host genome to prevent the alignment of viral reads to these regions, and this removal. This will help to ensure that we are only removing host reads and not viral reads.

* You will need to identify the viruses in your dataset and create a reference file. You can use the NCBI GenBank database & Entrez Direct (conda env) to download the reference genomes for the viruses in your dataset.
* You will then use hostile to mask your host reference genome with viral reference genomes. This will prevent the alignment of viral reads to the host genome and their subsequent removal.

```bash
hostile mask human.fna.gz lots-of-viral-genomes.fnz.gz --threads 8
```

### Remove host contamination
Now that we have our masked host genome, we can use Hostile to remove host contamination from our metagenomic data. 

```bash
hostile clean --fastq1 data.fastq.gz
```

### Check the read lengths
To check the read lengths of the cleaned data, you can use the following command:

```bash
zcat data.fastq.gz | awk 'NR%4==2{print length($1)}' | sort -n | uniq -c
```

Compare this to the uncleaned reads to see if the host removal has worked:

```bash
zcat data.fastq.gz | awk 'NR%4==2{print length($1)}' | sort -n | uniq -c
```
