# NanoPack Tutorial

## Introduction
Today we are going to look at some raw fastq files from a nanopore sequencing run.  We will use a tool called NanoPack to do some basic QC and analysis of the data.  NanoPack is a collection of tools for analyzing Oxford Nanopore sequencing data. It is designed to be a lightweight, portable, and dependency-free set of tools for basic analysis of nanopore sequencing data. Your task is to install NanoPack and run it on the fastq files that you have downloaded from the NCBI SRA database in a SLURM script.

## NanoPack Installation
### Step 1: Create Conda Environments for NanoPack
```bash
conda create --prefix /home/people/<username>/tools/nanopack_env python=3.8
```

### Step 2: Install NanoPack within Conda Environments
Activate the Conda environment
```bash
conda activate /home/people/<username>/tools/nanopack_env
```
Install NanoPack within the activated environment
```bash
pip install nanopack
```
Deactivate the Conda environment
```bash
conda deactivate
```
### Step 3: Run NanoPack
Activate the Conda environment
```bash
conda activate /home/people/<username>/tools/nanopack_env
```

Now nanopack can be used within this environment
```bash
nanopack --help
NanoPlot --help
nanoQC --help
NanoComp --help
```

### Deactivate the Conda environment
```bash
conda deactivate
```

## Run NanoPack on the Fastq Files in a SLURM Script
We will use the fastq files you have downloaded the nanopore sequencing runs listed in the sra_metadata.csv file. They are in fastq format and are located in the directory /home/people/<username>/scratch/training/data

Check the sra_metadata.csv file for more details on the fastq runs
```bash
cat /home/people/<username>/scratch/code_to_genomes/wk2/data/sra_metadata.csv
```

Pick a run that you find interesting and let's try to run NanoPlot on it in a new SLURM script. Remember all the elements required for a SLURM script.  

```bash
NanoPlot --fastq /home/people/<username>/scratch/code_to_genomes/wk2/data/SRR5085902/SRR5085902.fastq --outdir /home/people/<username>/scratch/code_to_genomes/wk2/data/SRR5085902
```

## Take it to the next level

###  NanoComp
NanoComp is a tool for comparing the quality of different nanopore sequencing runs. It can be used to compare the quality of different runs, or to compare the quality of the same run before and after some treatment. Add a section to your SLURM script that runs NanoComp on the fastq files that you have downloaded. Based on the results, what can you conclude about the quality of the runs? What do you learn about the read length, quality, and GC content of the reads? Does it align with the information in the associated publications? 

### NanoQC
NanoQC is a tool for assessing the quality of nanopore sequencing runs. It can be used to assess the quality of a single run, or to compare the quality of different runs. Add a section to your SLURM script that runs NanoQC on the fastq files that you have downloaded. What type of plots does NanoQC produce? What can you learn from these plots? Is it more or less useful than NanoPlot?
